---
---
# Abe Burmeister
- author:: [[om.co]]
- title:: Abe Burmeister
- tags:: #source/article #via/instapaper
- dates:: 2021-08-16 (synced)
- url:: https://om.co/2017/10/23/abe-burmeister-2/

## Highlights
- Wow. I mean, at the beginning we were so bootstrapped. We started with $15,000 combined in capital that we had saved up and we’ve never raised money. Tyler and I own the whole thing, so there’s been a lot of growth from that initial $15,000 to where we are now. We’re at about 17 employees now. I don’t want to get too much into the numbers, but that’s all organic, bootstrapped growth basically. That’s a lot of change — a lot of turning around and being like, wow, wait… what happened?
- Some of the ideas that we had about clothing have been validated, not just by people buying our stuff but by other companies, very large companies, copying what we do in different ways. Some of them more blatant than others, but there’s definitely a sense of validation of the concept — without question. As a business person, it’s a little less fun, just because there’s more competition. We were in a very blue sky space for a while where nobody else did what we did.
- First off, we actually feel a lot smaller now than we did when we were tiny, when it was just the two of us and $15,000. You don’t have any sense of scale at that sort of level of naivety, which is actually kind of helpful for starting a company. Now we feel really small because we’re very aware that we’re surrounded by giants. But beyond that, yeah, I mean it’s a hard road. It’s a lot of 80-hour work weeks like you don’t stop. Every winter, because of the seasonal fluctuations, cash flow and stuff, we always go through these sort of traumatic periods, where we’re like, can we squeeze through? We know that the sales will come in the spring, or they should, but you’re in the middle of winter and nobody’s buying anything.
- Still, you’ve got to buy everything for the next season, so it’s a lot of scraping by. Risk tolerance is really there. Without having a lot of capital, you don’t have that much of a buffer, right? But on the flip side, you can fix mistakes quicker, I think. It’s really easy to gloss things over with dollars.. When people get a big influx of capital, they start spending money. If they’re disciplined business people, then they spend it right, but it’s really hard not to get a windfall like that and not spend some of it on some dumb stuff. So [when you don’t have that sort of capital], you learn how to operate a profitable business — and that’s hard.
- they actually sold for a very nice multiple. They sold for about a 2x multiple, which is a very good valuation for an apparel company. The back-of-the-envelope valuation for an apparel company is 1x revenue. So actually, Bonobos did really well for themselves from that standpoint. I’m not going to say anything bad about them except that it was never my goal to sell my company to Walmart.
- I think about Apple, how they raised venture capital money very early on, but they had a very specific reason. Steve Jobs was like, “I need an injection molded case for a computer.” It’s really funny actually when you think about it. You know, computers came in metal cases back then that you could just whip up in a small machine shop, and he was like, “No, it needs to be an appliance. It needs to fit in the home.” It was a reference, right, and so they needed to cover the injection molding costs and that’s why they went and raised capital.
- We never hit that point. We’re happy with the organic growth we have and the level of control we have.
- Okay, I can tell you very explicitly, there’s a lot of failure in the e-commerce space and venture capital. I think the first thing I would say is that if you’re on the VC side and you’re looking to invest in one of these companies, or you’re running one of these companies and are looking for investors, you cannot put venture capital into inventory. There are no exponential returns on inventory. Once it’s in inventory, it’s this physical thing, it’s sitting there. You’re never going to get venture returns from a physical product that you just bought with somebody’s money who’s looking for a 10x, 100x return, so you need to put the money towards something that can generate the kind of return that a VC needs, right?
- Wow. That’s a tough one. I mean, traditional cotton and even organic cotton tends to need more water, and cotton also grows where food crops are grown, so cotton’s a really tough one when you look at it from an environmental perspective. Something like wool is sort of the opposite. You might look at wool and think, wow, the wool production uses so much land, it’s really intensive, but it’s land that almost nothing else can use. Sheep will graze on the side of a mountain. You can’t really turn that into cropland or harvest anything from it. So you’ve actually got a very efficient transformation of the sun’s energy into this beautiful fabric, just by sheep hanging out on the side of a mountain, eating some grass and living their lives.
- Abe: The first thing you have to know is why you want to be bootstrapped. I’m very happy that we’ve taken that path, and the reason we did it, really, is control. We thought that part of the reason other people weren’t doing it, and why some of those materials were available, is because they were getting too much pressure from their investors. We made a very conscious choice that we were going to try not to get capital and keep that level of control. On the flip side, if your company needs capital, it needs capital. You can’t be too stubborn about these things.
- But if you want to [start a business], and you’re bootstrapped, you’ve got to be profitable. There has to be more money coming in at the end that is going out because it’s going to go right back out. It won’t feel like you’re profitable because it’s all going back into inventory and salary and different places, but you’ve got to make sure that there’s enough money in the bank. Everything you make has to sell, essentially. You don’t want to sit on inventory. Inventory is death. That’s one of the hardest things about running a clothing company. You need enough inventory so people can buy stuff, but if you have too much, you’re basically going to go out of business, because all of your money’s sitting in a very illiquid asset. It’s trying to figure out how much you can do in a day while still getting enough sleep to stay alive.
