---
---
# jsomers.net | I Should Have Loved Biology
- author:: [[jsomers.net]]
- title:: jsomers.net | I Should Have Loved Biology
- tags:: #source/article #via/instapaper #biology
- dates:: 2021-08-16 (synced)
- url:: https://jsomers.net/i-should-have-loved-biology/
- mentioned in:: https://guscuddy.substack.com/p/substack-decentralization?s=w curtain 84
- 

## Highlights
- Someone probably told me that every cell in my body has the same DNA. But no one shook me by the shoulders, saying how crazy that was. I needed Lewis Thomas, who wrote in The Medusa and the Snail:
  For the real amazement, if you wish to be amazed, is this process. You start out as a single cell derived from the coupling of a sperm and an egg; this divides in two, then four, then eight, and so on, and at a certain stage there emerges a single cell which has as all its progeny the human brain. The mere existence of such a cell should be one of the great astonishments of the earth. People ought to be walking around all day, all through their waking hours calling to each other in endless wonderment, talking of nothing except that cell ([View Highlight](https://instapaper.com/read/1363925479/14663629))
- Enormous subjects are best approached in thin, deep slices. I discovered this when first learning how to program. The textbooks never worked; it all only started to click when I started to do little projects for myself. The project wasn’t just motivation but an organizing principle, a magnet to arrange the random iron filings I picked up along the way. I’d care to learn about some abstract concept, like “memoization,” because I needed it to solve my problem; and these concepts would lose their abstractness in the light of my example. ([View Highlight](https://instapaper.com/read/1363925479/14663970))
- I’ve never come across a subject so fractal in its complexity. It reminds me of computing that way. A day of programming might involve constructing an elaborate regular expression, investigating a file descriptor leak, debugging a race condition in the application you just wrote, and thinking through the interface of a module. Everywhere you look—the compiler, the shell, the CPU, the DOM—is an abstraction hiding lifetimes of work. Biology is like this, just much, much worse, because living systems aren’t intentionally designed. It’s all a big slop of global mutable state. Control is achieved by upregulating this thing while turning down the promoter of that thing’s repressor. You think you know how something works—like when I thought I had a handle on the neutrophil, an important front-line player in the innate immune system—only to learn that it comes in several flavors, and more are still being discovered, and some of them seem to do the opposite of the ones you thought you knew. ([View Highlight](https://instapaper.com/read/1363925479/14664090))
- But biology, like computing, has a bottom, and the bottom is not abstract. It’s physical. It’s shapes bumping into each other. In fact the great revelation of twentieth-century molecular biology was the coupling of structure to function. An aperiodic crystal that forms paired helices is the natural store of heredity because of its ability to curl up and unwind and double itself with complements. ([View Highlight](https://instapaper.com/read/1363925479/14664091))
- I think my understanding of biology was too flow-charty in high school. I knew that DNA → RNA → protein and that this was called “gene expression,” but I was confused on the basics, like, how did genes actually “turn on”? And once they were on, were they on for good? It’s clearer when you think physically. Mammalian DNA isn’t laid out as one long double helix; it’s tightly coiled and coiled again, like this, around little circular proteins called histones: ([View Highlight](https://instapaper.com/read/1363925479/14664131))
    - Note: Pic
- So that’s the foundation. Or almost: I have left for last my favorite resource of all, an incredible book called The Eighth Day of Creation: Makers of the Revolution in Biology, by Horace Freeland Judson. Parts of this book were serialized in the New Yorker in the 1970s. It is the Power Broker of biology, a tomic masterwork. It is not just comprehensive—Judson had hundreds of conversations with Francis Crick, with Jacques Monod and François Jacob, with their friends and spouses and colleagues; he read every paper, he read all their letters—but it pulls no punches scientifically. Judson always just describes the real thing ([View Highlight](https://instapaper.com/read/1363925479/14664293))
- Put another way, the book gives us a view of science before discovery. It is a practitioner’s view of the subject. It is the opposite of a textbook.
  * ([View Highlight](https://instapaper.com/read/1363925479/14664324))
- There are some incredible YouTube explainers. Ninja Nerd Science’s videos on the immune system were a miracle—all delivered by a kid in grad school. He is a genius. What he does so well is what Goodsell, in that Machinery of Life book, does so well, what those famous “Inner Life of a Cell” 3D animations do so well: he helps you “see the unseeable ([View Highlight](https://instapaper.com/read/1363925479/14664332))
    - Note: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC6QYFutt9cluQ3uSM963_KQ
- This is exactly what I wanted as I was writing my immune system article. I wanted to conjure models I could play with in my hand. I wanted a museum where I could walk around inside the epithelium during an immune response. I wanted to put ideas into physical space, like on a pinboard—TLRs go here, with the other innate armament; CD4+ T cells are there, in the adaptive world—but I wanted it to be as searchable, copy-pasteable, shareable, and composable as text. ([View Highlight](https://instapaper.com/read/1363925479/14664378))
- Reading list: 
  - [ ] The Machinery of Life, David Goodsell
  - [ ] A Computer Scientist’s Guide to Cell Biology, William W. Cohen
  - [ ] The Eighth Day of Creation: Makers of the Revolution in Biology, Horace Freeland Judson ([View Highlight](https://instapaper.com/read/1363925479/14664397))