---
---
- author:: [[Nick Pinkerton]]
- title:: Police Story and Police Story 2: Law and Disorder
- tags:: #source/article #via/hypothesis
- date:: [[2021-11-19]] (synced)
- url:: https://www.criterion.com/current/posts/6325-police-story-and-police-story-2-law-and-disorder
- citation:: criterion.com,

## Highlights
et’s not mince words: the mall brawl that concludes Jackie Chan’s 1985 film Police Story is to action cinema what Beethoven’s Fifth is to symphonic music, what Charles Dickens’s Bleak House is to the nineteenth-century novel, what Théodore Géricault’s The Raft of the Medusa is to representative painting. It was, at the moment of its appearance, the absolute pinnacle of contemporary achievement in a particular field of human endeavor—the recording of fragile, imperiled human bodies moving propulsively in concert—and it remains a shining paragon, a marvel for all times. It showcases the remarkable cinematic, physical, and—in his fearlessness in the face of legitimately hazardous stunt work—psychological skill set of the film’s director-star, as well as the derring-do of the Sing Ga Ban, or Jackie Chan Stunt Team, a death-defying second-unit suicide squad that doubled as Chan’s entourage. It is the hell-bent, relentless, shoot-the-works standout among the many go-for-broke sequences that mark Chan’s Police Story and its 1988 sequel—films united in adroit athleticism and populist, anti-authority cheek, as well as documents of what prodigious feats are possible when a mind that understands film form, the body of an acrobat in peak condition, and an appetite for anarchy combine in one artist.

Per Chan’s most recent autobiography, Never Grow Up, the scene was shot by night, while he was spending his days working on Sammo Hung’s Heart of Dragon (1985). The pace at which Hong Kong films were turned out then was frenetic, but Chan in these years went especially hard. Strange as it is to imagine, considering his eventual durability as a celebrity, he was then still a very recently poor kid trying to capitalize as much as he could on his new status as a martial-arts action star, not at the time a gig that offered many models for longevity.

A star in Hong Kong, that is. In the late seventies, almost as soon as he had solidified his popularity at home, he fixed his sights on conquering America, too, as Lee had done. His early efforts in that direction—The Big Brawl (1980, a teaming with Enter the Dragon director Robert Clouse); a comic-relief role in the Hal Needham–directed Burt Reynolds vehicle The Cannonball Run (1981)—were commercial and creative disappointments, and Chan, used to the atmosphere of fluid on-location improvisation typical of his Hong Kong shoots, bridled in particular at the lack of opportunities to riff.

Needham had begun, with 1978’s Hooper, ending his films with blooper reels, a send-off that left audiences with a feeling of having almost participated in the on-set camaraderie. When Chan borrowed the idea—every one of his films after Dragon Lord (1982) would include outtakes of flubbed lines and performers, usually Chan himself, wincing in agony following a stunt gone awry—he helped cement his intimate, jovial relationship with his public.

Chan felt himself miscast as “a tough guy in the mold of Clint Eastwood,” and with a mind to creating a custom-fit job for Chan’s persona, the two set to work in their usual arrangement, with Chan conjuring up the set pieces and Tang providing the connective plot tissue that would get them from one brush with death to the next.

The basic plot materials of Police Story may be indebted to the American cop opera, but it’s evident right away in the film’s reckless, ricocheting action that this is Hong Kong, not Hollywood. The movie begins with one of Jackie’s most highlight-reel-anthologized sequences, a blown sting operation in one of the hillside shantytowns that at that time dotted the outskirts of the notoriously overcrowded city—opening here and concluding as it does in the glass-and-chrome mallscape, the film offers a portrait of Hong Kong as a city of wild contrasts, of penthouses and poverty. When the cops are spotted by their gangster prey, a gunfight erupts, leading to a pursuit in which Jackie and his quarries level the village while slaloming through it in speeding vehicles, totaled and abandoned for a double-decker bus off of which our hero valiantly dangles by the hook of an umbrella. The conveyance is finally brought to a screeching halt when he cuts it off at the pass following a breakneck run down a nearly sheer downhill plunge, the crooks punching through the windshields to drop neatly at his feet in a sight gag that might’ve sprung straight from the drawing board of Tex Avery.

Unlike the original, Police Story 2 doesn’t start out with a bang—it’s a more measured, parceled-out affair, with each set piece a little bigger and wilder than the one before it, a short donnybrook in a restaurant followed in due course by a swashbuckling clash in a city park that pits Chan against a whole gang swinging steel bars, everything leading toward grand-finale fireworks in an abandoned factory that’s acting as headquarters for a gang of mad bombers who’ve been terrorizing the city, a sequence that seems to nod to contemporary platformer video games, replete as it is with Donkey Kong–style barrel tossing, and one that gives Ka-kui his most formidable opponent to date, a bomb-tossing, mute villain played by longtime Stunt Team member Benny Lai. Throughout, Chan and the Sing Ga Ban display a total disdain for the simple knockdown flop. If somebody’s going to drop, they’re not just going to fall; better to go into a backflip ending in a face-plant or a spinning-top pirouette; best to hit something, hard, on the way down: a vase, a table, a pane of plate glass, some jungle-gym equipment, an industrial chute hopper, whatever’s handy and looks like it hurts, bad.

The more you watch it, the more you come to appreciate how much of Police Story 2, like most any Chan production of the period, relies on total trust between the performer and his team, on crack timing that requires multiple actors to hit multiple marks with synchronized, clockwork precision.

Sundered flesh and broken bones are passing pains, while cinema lasts forever—so relish these twin monuments of Hong Kong filmmaking in its golden age, consecrated by the pain of their heroic performers.

