---
---
- author:: [[matthew ball]]
- title:: The Metaverse: What It Is, Where to Find It, Who Will Build It, and Fortnite — Matthew Ball
- tags:: #source/article #via/instapaper [[Metaverse]] [[Fortnite]] [[Facebook]]
- dates:: 2021-08-16 (synced)
- url:: https://www.matthewball.vc/all/themetaverse

# The Metaverse: What It Is, Where to Find It, Who Will Build It, and Fortnite — Matthew Ball

## Highlights
- The “Streaming Wars” have only just begun, yet the first streaming video took place more than 25 years ago. What’s more, many of the attributes of this so-called war have been hypothesized for decades, such as virtually infinite supplies of content, on-demand playback, interactivity, dynamic and personalized ads, and the value of converging content with distribution
- By the time Netflix launched its streaming service, much of Hollywood knew that the future of television was online (IP TV had been deployed in the late 1999s). The challenge was timing and how to package such a service (it took another 10 years for Hollywood to accept all of their channels, genres and content needs to be collapsed into a single app/brand). The popularity of video game broadcasting and YouTubers still elude many in the media industry, as does the idea that the best way to monetize content might be to give it away for free and charge for optional $0.99 items of no consequential value.
- Since the late 1970s and early 1980s, many of those in the technology community have imagined a future state of, if not quasi-successor to, the Internet – called the “Metaverse”. And it would revolutionize **not just the infrastructure layer of the digital world, but also much of the physical one**, as well as all the services and platforms atop them, how they work, and what they sell. Although the full vision for the Metaverse remains hard to define, seemingly fantastical, and decades away, the pieces have started to feel very real.
- To this end, the Metaverse has become the newest macro-goal for many of the world’s tech giants. As I outlined in February of 2019, it is the **express goal of Epic Games**, maker of the Unreal Engine and Fortnite. It is also the **driver behind Facebook’s purchase of Oculus VR** and its newly announced Horizon virtual world/meeting space, among many, many other projects, such as AR glasses and brain-to-machine communications. The tens of billions that will be spent on cloud gaming over the next decade, too, is based on the belief that such technologies will underpin our online-offline future.
- the most well-worn is likely to be a copy of Neal Stephenson’s Snow Crash, which first described and essentially coined the terms “Metaverse” and “Avatar
- Just as it was hard to envision in 1982 what the Internet of 2020 would be — and harder still to communicate it to those who had never even “logged” onto it at that time — we don’t really know how to describe the Metaverse. However, we can identify core attributes.
- **The Metaverse, we think, will...**
	- Be **persistent** – which is to say, it never “resets” or “pauses” or “ends”, it just continues indefinitely
	- Be **synchronous** and live – even though pre-scheduled and self-contained events will happen, just as they do in “real life”, the Metaverse will be a living experience that exists consistently for everyone and in real time
	- Have no real cap to concurrent participations with an individual sense of “**presence**” – everyone can be a part of the Metaverse and participate in a specific event/place/activity together, at the same time and with individual agency
	- Be a **fully functioning economy** – individuals and businesses will be able to create, own, invest, sell, and be rewarded for an incredibly wide range of “work” that produces “value” that is recognized by others
	- Be an experience that **spans both the digital and physical worlds**, private and public networks/experiences, and open and closed platforms
		- Note:: this feels reminiscent of some of the goals of [[Crypto]] [[web3]], [[Ethereum]], and specifically [[FWB]]
	- Offer unprecedented **interoperability of data**, digital items/assets, content, and so on across each of these experiences – your “Counter-Strike” gun skin, for example, could also be used to decorate a gun in Fortnite, or be gifted to a friend on/through Facebook. Similarly, a car designed for Rocket League (or even for Porsche’s website) could be brought over to work in Roblox
	- Be populated by **“content” and “experiences” created and operated by an incredibly wide range of contributors**, some of whom are independent individuals, while others might be informally organized groups or commercially-focused enterprises
	    - Note:: This sounds dystopian. Where is the role of art?
	        - lmao
- **The Metaverse is not…**
	- A ~~“virtual world” ~~– Virtual worlds and games with AI driven characters have existed for decades, as have those populated with “real” humans in real time. This isn’t a “meta” (**Greek for “beyond”**) universe, just a synthetic and fictional one designed for a single purpose (a game).
	- A ~~“virtual space”~~ – Digital content experiences like Second Life are often seen as “proto-Metaverses” because they (A) lack game-like goals or skill systems; (B) are virtual hangouts that persist; (C) offer nearly synchronous content updates; and (D) have real humans represented by digital avatars. However, these are not sufficient attributes for the Metaverse. Instead, they are just virtual bulletin/message boards that are set in a visual world that includes visual representations of the posters.
	- “Virtual reality” – VR is a way to experience a virtual world or space. Sense of presence in a digital world doesn’t make a Metaverse. It is like saying you have a thriving city because you can see and walk around it.
	- A “digital and virtual economy” – These, too, already exist. Individual games such as World of Warcraft have long had functioning economies where real people trade virtual goods for real money, or perform virtual tasks in exchange for real money. In addition, platforms such as Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, as well as technologies such as Bitcoin, are based around the hiring of individuals/businesses/computational power to perform virtual and digital tasks
	- A “game” – Fortnite has many elements of the Metaverse. It (A) mashes up IP; (B) has a consistent identity that spans multiple closed platforms; (C) is a gateway to a myriad of experiences, some of which are purely social; (D) compensates creators for creating content, etc. However, as is the case with Ready Player One, it remains too narrow in what it does, how far it extends, and what “work” can occur (at least for now)
	- A “virtual theme park or Disneyland” – Not only will the “attractions” be infinite, they will be not be centrally “designed” or programmed like Disneyland, nor will they all be about fun or entertainment.
	- A “new app store” – No one needs another way to open apps, nor would doing so “in VR” (as an example) unlock/enable the sorts of value supposed by a successor Internet.
	- A “new UGC platform” - The Metaverse is not just another YouTube or Facebook-like platform in which countless individuals can “create”, “share”, and “monetize” content, and where the most popular content represents only the tiniest share of overall consumption
- The value of being a key participant, if not a driver, of such a system is self-evident – there is no “owner” of the Internet today, but nearly all of the leading Internet companies rank among the 10 most valuable public companies on earth. And if the Metaverse does indeed
- there will be no clean “Before Metaverse” and “After Metaverse”. Instead, it will **slowly emerge over time** as different products, services, and capabilities integrate and meld together. However, it’s helpful to think of three core elements that need to come into place.
  (One way I try to think about these three areas is via the Book of Genesis – first, “God” must create the underlying universe (“concurrency infrastructure”), then s/he must define its laws of physics and rules (“standards and protocols”), then s/he must fill it with life (“content”) that’s worthwhile, evolves, and iterates against selection pressures. God, in other words, doesn’t create and design the world as though it were a miniature model, but enables one to grow across a mostly blank tableau etc.)
- Not only does the Metaverse require infrastructure that currently does not exist, the Internet was never designed for anything near this experience. After all, it was designed to share files from one computer to another. As a result, most of the Internet’s underlying systems are oriented around one server talking to one other server or an end-user device.
- To operate, the Metaverse requires something more akin to video conferencing and video games. These experiences work because of persistent connections that update each other in real-time and with a degree of accuracy that other programs don’t generally need. However, they tend not to have high levels of concurrency: most video chat programs max out beyond a few people, and once you hit 50, you tend to need to “live stream” a broadcast to your viewers, rather than share a two-way connection.
- Eve Online, for example, can technically have more than 100,000 players “in the same game”, but they are split across different galaxies (i.e. server nodes)
- This is why considering Fortnite as video game or interactive experience is to think too small and too immediately. **Fortnite began as a game, but it quickly evolved into a social square**. Its players aren’t logging in to “play”, per se, but to be with their virtual and real-world friends. Teenagers in the 1970s to 2010s would come home and spend three hours talking on the phone. Now they talk to their friends on Fortnite, but not about Fortnite – but school, movies, sports, news and more. After all, Fortnite doesn’t have a story or IP – the plot is what happens on it and who is there.
- Fortnite creative director at game awards says the goal is **“to create a metaverse, a place where all IP can live together, where all kinds of experiences can happen”** - @DonaldMustard cc @ballmatthew pic.twitter.com/eSwVnnzfZk
  — Julie Young (@juliey4) December 13, 2019
- Disney’s The Mandalorian **was shot and fully rendered in Unreal**, with director Jon Favreau able to literally enter its digital sets to frame a shot and position characters. If Disney so chooses, audiences could freely investigate much of these sets — most of the environment and assets already exist. And outside film and TV, Unreal is increasingly being used for live events, too: Unreal powers Fox Sports’s NASCAR set, for example.
	- note:: [[Unreal]] seems to be a critical piece of technology in this regard. Already being used to shoot The Mandalorian.