---
---
# TikTok and the Evolution of Digital Blackface by Jason Parham

- Author:: [[Jason Parham]]
- Full Title:: TikTok and the Evolution of Digital Blackface
- URL:: https://www.wired.com/story/tiktok-evolution-digital-blackface
- Recommended By::
- Tags:: #source/article #TikTok #socialMedia #Algorithm 
- Over a period of two months, I heard from 29 Black creators who shared stories about muted posts, in-app harassment, and incidents of racism. They said the problems on the app are **deeper and more widespread** than simple isolated incidents.
- Together, their experiences belie the perception of TikTok as an app of joy and creativity, revealing instead a place **tangled up in an ancient pain**—a site of blurred visions and youthful ignorances, where **flattery quickly turns into mockery, mockery into theft, and theft into something altogether more disturbing**.
- Bought by Twitter in 2012, Vine became the dominant engine of Black culture on the internet from around 2014 to 2016. It rivaled Twitter in its capacity to incubate trends, hyping Southern dance crazes such as the Nae Nae and career-boosting comedians like King Bach.
- By 2018, ByteDance had released the app outside China, acquired the lip-sync app Musical.ly, and renamed the international version TikTok.
- The platform elevated creativity and experimentation above all else; its [[Algorithm]], as Blackmon puts it, is generous. Though personalized based on user activity, For You feeds retain a light randomness—according to TikTok, the [[Algorithm]] tries to avoid duplicating content or privileging accounts with large followings. As Blackmon says, “it's one of the only places where you can have no following, no content, and you post one thing and it gets a million views in a day.”
- In the beginning, TikTok's embrace of wackiness and absence of anything even marginally serious was its prime attraction, and its most marketable one.
- The common denominator of many of its viral moments is an unspoken partiality to Black cultural expression. It works like an accelerant. Chart-topping rap songs, from the likes of Drake and K Camp and Megan Thee Stallion, provide the soundtrack to weekly dance challenges. Lil Nas X is the app's first breakout artist, and its most recognized pedagogue around self-improvement, Tabitha Brown, is a Black mother and vegan from North Carolina.
- Videos like Guarino's are among a disturbing and ongoing form of content production that suggests a twisted love of Black culture through caricature. It's been called digital blackface, and Blackmon started seeing examples of it almost immediately after she joined TikTok, mostly being posted by young white women and white gay men.
- Minstrelsy thrives on TikTok, but the phenomenon goes back a long way. The earliest American iterations emerged in the 1840s as a form of entertainment and endured for more than a century. White people would darken their skin with burnt cork, greasepaint, or shoe polish and perform in variety shows. The musical acts, comedy sketches, and dances relied on stock characters, like Sambo and Zip Coon, to parade Blackness as laughably uneducated or as a target of humiliation. By the 1950s, the shows fell out of favor, but as Lauren Michele Jackson, the academic and author of White Negroes, put it, “the tenets of minstrel performance remain alive today in television, movies, music, and, in its most advanced iteration, on the internet.”
- Unlike Facebook and Twitter, where instances of digital blackface are either text-based (abusing Black vernacular) or image-based (trotting out memes or GIFs of Black celebrities), TikTok is a video-first platform, and on it, **creators embody Blackness with an auteur-driven virtuosity—taking on Black rhythms, gestures, affect, slang**.
- Almost every #HowsMyForm video played on degrading stereotypes of some kind—Middle Eastern people as terrorists, Mexicans as border-hopping illegal immigrants, poor white people as inbred hicks—and the majority of these videos use a three-act structure.
- Some of the most insidious satirize slavery
- Wearing a mask has long been part of the social internet. The web has operated like a Party City costume shop since dotcom-era chat rooms made cool the idea of inhabiting made-up identities and hiding behind usernames. These personas could be intensely liberating, allowing people to explore hidden ideas or sexualities, or simply enjoy a carnivalesque permissiveness to say or do something outrageous.
	- **Note:** Interesting idea about [[masks]] here. If there were a second season of Watchmen, it almost could focus on minstrelsy - tho it does (sort of) cover that in season 1 with the show within a show
- As the web expanded, the masks came to audiovisual life—and the pain only deepened. In the early 2010s, Sweet Brown and Charles Ramsey offered live-witness accounts of real-life horrors on the nightly news, only to have their words refashioned and auto-tuned into internet fodder. Everybody has seen “Ain't nobody got time for that!” or “Dead giveaway!” filtered through social media, the suffering of real people taking on cruel shapes, remade into shareable emblems of mockery and humor. When this happens, Blackness—or what is perceived as Black identity—thrives outside of context. It's diluted and remixed to a dizzying degree. Black people lose control over how their humanity is presented.
- In an attempt to open the channels of communication, TikTok promised to “repair that trust” and “actively promote and protect” diversity across the platform. In a letter released two weeks after Blackout Day, the company partially owned up to the uneven treatment of its Black creators, apologizing to anyone who has “felt unsafe, unsupported, or suppressed,” the letter said
- It has formed a “creator diversity collective” to regularly meet with executive leadership, established a fund to generate revenue for users, and hired an AI policy analyst whose research focuses on racial bias in algorithms.
- Never have moving pictures felt as urgent, mesmerizing, and immediate as they do on the app. At their best, their most useful, these images flicker across our screens with an infectious kineticism.
- **And they're built, by design, on a kind of appropriation**—the original lip-syncing app required users to mime existing audio. TikTok hinges on how **imaginatively users can build upon something that's already out there**; it becomes all about the transformation. What sours this creative repackaging, mutates the joy into hatefulness, is when the **content is estranged from its original context**.
